Understanding learning as experience : An autoethnographic investigation through sport and outdoor education

INTRODUCTION

This autoethnography is focused on researching how learning through sport and outdoor education works as experience. As a student and athlete, since young age, we are engrained with this perception that primary, secondary, college and university are a preparation for life, when in fact, education is part of life itself. To better understand this statement, first we should ask ourselves, what is life? Is life only what comes after so many years of studies? What is life while we study? From my point of view, life starts since the day we are born, and every activity or occupation we undertake is valuable experience, and with the pass of years, an occupation can have different meanings. This way of thinking was brought many years ago by John Dewey, an American philosopher, who studied human learning. Furthermore, his ideas still seem to cause controversy between pedagogues, who are deeply rooted with traditional education concepts, who think that education is just a preparatory period for life, where students are only supposed to learn huge amounts of knowledge, with the sole purpose of ‘preparing them for life’. This leads us to the main point of, how does learning work as experience? 

In this autoethnography, I will take on two activities, in order to discuss how learning works as experience. These activities have been written into two narratives, for the purpose of taking them apart and analysing them. By analysing them, we will be able to gain an insight on how does learning works as experience.


BACKGROUND

In order to develop this research, we are going to draw concepts from Dewey’s philosophical studies on democracy and education during the 1900s. Dewey’s philosophical ideas are a great fit for this study since he breaks apart from traditional education, which is focused on the pedagogue teaching and the students listening carefully, obediently and respectfully to his instructions. And also from the liberal education, which is too open, giving students the right to choose whatever they feel like, but this has the problem to give them the right to choose their path depending on their emotional states, which change very occasionally. Therefore, Dewey adopted a more progressive education system, which bases an individual on having the freedom to explore any field they like, and the role of the pedagogue is to guide and support rather than mandating what is learnt. Therefore, what is achieved in this kind of education system, is one that let students explore and be whoever they feel like being, giving a meaning and a purpose to what they do.

We will also use be using the term ‘occupation’ which, as described by Dewey (1916), is ‘a continuos activity having a purpose’. In this research, an ‘occupation’ extends further than just the mere action of doing a job, just to get in return a monetary remuneration. As stated by Quay (2015), an occupation is a “way of being, as well as a way of doing, as well as a way of knowing”.

Also, we will be working very closely with John Quay’s book, ‘Understanding Life in School’, which studies and makes a comparison between how students learn when they are at school and when they are doing outdoor activities. Quay’s study makes an important point about how important  the occupations took in our childhood, that might look not important at all, are very meaningful in our adulthood. He invites us to see this education in two ways, through the line-time and the life-time, in order for us to get a more insightful way of understanding the relevance of occupations in our transition from childhood to adulthood. This context fits perfectly with our question of, how does learning work as experience. When being an academic student, we mostly focus on grades, exams and deadlines and, as mentioned before, we see this as necessary and compulsory in order for us to feel prepared for life, when in fact, we are missing out of life.


METHODOLOGY 

For this paper, we will be using an autoethnography to take on this research. To understand why we decided to use it, first we need to analyse its meaning and where it comes from. According to Ellis (2004) and Jones (2005), an autoethnography is a research method were there is a systematic approach to analyse own experiences in order to know more about cultural experiences. 

The foremost and most important reason why this method was chosen is because, in Dewey’s  (1916) statements about philosophical education, there is an emphasis on ‘living the experience’. This idea fits perfectly well with the purpose of this paper, which is understanding how learning via sport and outdoor education works as experience. The second reason, this method was chosen is because, this is an issue that affects me directly and also it is very hard to get factual evidence to support the arguments. We do not want this to be another research about what is right and what is not, we want to empathise with any kind of reader and make them understand, with grounds on personal experience, about the inherited importance of this topic.

In order to collect information for this process, and understand more about how learning works as experience, I was set to do two challenges. One was a Fun Run and the other was a three day bush walk. The information collected from the Fun Run involved the pre-run activities, this means all the training sessions and other activities associated with it, the run day, and the post run activities, which includes any event or realisation after the run. The second challenge involved a three day bush walk to Wilson’s Promontory National Park. We where set in groups of approximately 6 - 7 people,  where we had to share tents, cooking tasks, guiding tasks and had to cover an approximated trail of 30+ kilometres. During these challenges, details that I thought were important for this research were annotated in a journal, in order for me to have a better memory recompilation of the adventures that were written in the narratives for both challenges. The narratives were written in order to aid in the understanding of the experiences, which will be analysed more in detail throughout this paper.

Furthermore, being a university student aids in writing this research. We will be giving a simple scenario of how life in university helps in understanding how learning work as experience. There was no need to write this as narratives because, for now, university is part of our everyday life, thus we have a clear and concise idea of it.


ANALYSIS DATASET 1

The very first challenge that I was set to do, the Fun Run, was a totally new activity for me. It was my first time participating in a run and I would have never thought that an activity like this would have helped me gain so much experience and knowledge. Lets start by analysing some of the pre run preparation. As acclaimed in the narratives, during the second training session, ‘it was great to see so many people training in Princess Park, trying to reach their own goals, competing or just enjoying the moment’. This was a good insight into Dewey’s philosophical thoughts about education, we always think of everything as preparation for life, but we never understand that life is the present we are living. Furthermore, as stated in the narrative during the same training session, ‘my shins started hurting, inhibiting me from keeping up with the group, as the pain slowly increases until the point I can not run more. Having to finish early, this left me frustrated and unaccomplished’.  As it can be seen here, this was not exactly a nice episode of my challenge, but overall it is learning. You get to connect more with your body if you listen to it, and even though it was a frustrating experience, this is a good time to reflect on who you are, what are you doing and how you do it, which goes according to Dewey’s meaning of occupations.

Furthermore, looking forward into the race day, more accurately halfway through the 2.5km, as told in the narratives, ‘Every step was becoming a struggle and I had to focus on my breathing, my steps and my goal. Coming to the last turn, before the finish line, it felt so good to be finishing the run. People was there waiting for us, cheering us and there was a nice feeling of community. ’.  This is another example that show us how values and key skills can be learn through these kind of activities. For example, here we can see that resilience and being a team player can be learnt from these experiences and moreover, we learn to adapt and find a purpose for this occupation.


ANALYSIS DATASET 2

The second challenge was a very challenging one. I have never ever done something like this before. Back in my country, it is not engrained in our culture to go bush walking because of multiple reasons, therefore, this was a totally new experience. Lets look at a passage from the beginning of the bush walk, ‘Grocery shopping for the bush walk was a different story. Usually when doing grocery shopping one does not think how it is going to be packed, how do I bring it back home or should I not buy this because it is too bulky. This were questions that were constantly in my mind when doing it’. Here we can see how the meaning of grocery shopping changes with respect to the purpose behind it. This is what Quay (2015) is trying to convey when he gives his example about gardening, ‘For example, a child, an adolescent and an adult may be involved in a garden, gardening, as gardeners. However, what gardening means as an occupation across all three may differ enormously. ’. The purpose of why we do an activity is what gives a meaning to it, and even many people can be doing the same activity, each one will see it in a different way.

Furthermore, as told in the narrative for the last day going back home, ‘In the morning, I was feeling very sore from the hike. In my head I was wondering, how will I be able to make it back home. But as every step we took, there was an inner emotion growing with it. The feeling of reaching home was making me strive to not give up and let my mates down’. As mentioned in the analysis on the Fun Run, there are difficult times that we have to go through in our experiences, but this is an important process. In this situations, we can go from who we are, to what to do and to how to do it, and we can go back and forth through these concepts, helping us resolve a situation, which at the end is a life lesson.


ANALYSIS DATASET 3

Being a university student, it gives me the chance to reflect about the type of education I am receiving. Students are always worrying about grades, exams, deadlines, presentations and more. Being in the final year of my degree, I come to the realisation that most of the time, teachers just try to sink us with information, which at the end, most of the time we might not use. Taken from a personal perspective, we are always focus on being up to date with lectures, finishing our assignments on time. But most of the time, we miss the most important part of it, which is experiencing it. But this is not the responsibility of the university staff, this is what we have been told since we are kids, education is preparation for life. As mentioned by Quay (2015), there is an ‘ontological disconnect’, meaning there is no connection between what we learn and how do we apply it. If we were to have a better education system, this ‘oncological disconnect’ is what needs to be fixed. Placing in the perspective of students, the who we can be and tying it with the doing and knowledge is the best way to start revolutionising the education system into a better one.


CONCLUSION

In conclusion, we can see how Dewey’s philosophical theory of occupations is clearly related to our datasets. First we started by analysing Dewey’s philosophical concepts about a ‘progressive education’. We also had a look at John Quay’s book, ‘Understanding Life in School’, which focuses on juxtaposing life in school and life in camp. He also elaborates more on the meaning of occupations given by Dewey and how they change depending on the person we are.

All this theory and concepts were a good background to understand better the issue we talk about of how does learning work as experience. To try to prove this, I set myself up for two challenges, a Fun Run and a Bush walk trip. What I wanted to prove is that sport and outdoor education is a good way of learning, even though many pedagogues will be sceptical to this form of education. As we show with the first dataset, sports is a good way to learn many skills. We saw that by preparing for the run, there were a lot of barriers trying to deter us, but these are just ways of learning. 

Furthermore, with the bush walk, we saw how the same occupation, can have different meanings for different persons, in different ages. This gives us a clear example of how does outdoor education works as learning. Clearly, many people that had not the privilege to bush walk before, the occupation of grocery shopping had a totally different purpose and meaning for every individual that went on it, giving each of us a very different lesson. It is also good to point out that, while doing these activities, we are living life, not just preparing for life.




























REFERENCES 

Dewey, J. (1916). Democracy and Education. New York: The Free Press (MW 9.2–375).
Dewey, J. ‘The School and Society’ in Jo Ann Boydston (ed), The Collected Works of John Dewey, 1882-1953 - Electronic Edition - Middle Works, Volume 1 (Southern Illinois University Press, 1889)
Ellis, C., Adams, T., & Bochner, A. (2011). Autoethnography: An Overview. Historical Social Research / Historische Sozialforschung, 36(4 (138)), 273-290. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/23032294

Quay, J. (2015). Understanding Life in School. Palgrave Macmillan.

Quay, J., & Seaman, J. (2013). John Dewey and Education Outdoors. Rotterdam: SensePublishers.

Nicol, R. (2013). Returning to the richness of experience: is autoethnography a useful approach for outdoor educators in promoting pro-environmental behaviour?. Journal Of Adventure Education & Outdoor Learning, 13(1), 3-17. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14729679.2012.679798

Stolz, S. (2017). John Quay on experiential learning. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=508kuIob6Os











